hello everyone and thank you for joining
us
I'm dr. Gary severance and I'm pleased
to present to you a special clinical
update webinar as part of the weekly
series from Henry Schein on Co bed 19
shortly I'll be turning it over to dr.
David Resnick for his clinical update
but I wanted to let you all know that we
are so appreciative of your comments and
suggestions and questions that generate
content for future episodes based on
that we wanted to step back just a
little bit to let you know or what has
changed and give you the basic
information on code that 19 the virus
the virus is an airborne pathogen it can
be spread through contact and through
aerosol transmission coughs and sneezes
are most often mentioned for the general
public it can remain airborne for
approximately three hours and travel up
to 13 feet and air that's up from the
expected six feet originally and it can
live on hard surfaces for a few days the
virus is 0.125 microns in diameter but
it's normally carried by water droplets
much larger than a micron now all this
is important because dentistry
essentially creates aerosols with nearly
every procedure the use of high speed
handpiece is ultrasonics air water
syringe all can create air assaults now
in every dental office and our
specialties have their own unique
environment procedure mix and patient
flow so it's difficult to have one
solution for the entire office or every
office
now while dentistry with its PPE was
probably the best prepared of the
healthcare professions it's safe to
suggest that coming back more will need
to be done there will be greater
emphasis on ensuring patient and team
member safety and there probably will be
the introduction of a new category ope
office protective equipment how can we
reduce aerosols that are generated
during the treatment any aerosol that
escapes the mouth that we don't capture
with high speed evacuation how can we
eliminate that air purification filter
scrubbers etc
and because we want to minimize exposure
to the patient and to our dental team
will probably minimize the number of
patient visits and doing so will have to
maximize production during each visit so
there's a lot to talk about especially
when we get into room turnover as PPE
and what the office environment is going
to look like in the future one thing we
do know we have to control the patient
flow throughout the entire office and
throughout their entire procedure
everything from waiting in the cars to
waiting in a waiting room to getting
back into the treatment room and out now
please sure that Henry Schein along with
probably all dental manufacturers are
comprehensively looking at how the
products they offer or will offer or
bring to market will help meet the
expected and mandatory needs for the
safety of the profession now let's turn
it over to dr. David Resnick for his
weekly update Thank You dr. Resnick for
joining us again thanks Gary it's great
to be back with you again this week to
look at some of the different changes we
have and little advances that have been
going on since we spoke the last time
it's I'm David Resnick I am chief of
dental medicine at Grady Health System
in Atlanta and I'm here to least to talk
about some of the things that would that
we're seeing and and some of it is a
little bit of conflicting messages so I
do want to take things back a little bit
and drop things down to a level we are
not trying to create operating rooms
that is we do have operating rooms for
certain oral surgical procedures but
these are not hospital based
recommendations we are an ambulatory
care program that is trying to create a
very safe environment for our patients
for the rest of our teams for our
families but we're not trying to
recreate an O R then there are some
certain questions you know that I
brought up or certain things I might
bring up that well when you look at some
of the studies you'll see that on the
floor there's a great deal of of the
virus and so I mentioned it might not be
the worst idea to put on booties well
this really is just
protect your family at home because you
don't want to attract this stuff out of
the dental clinic and if you use the
good air scrubber at night the floors
are probably going to be fine so this is
just some of those little things that
are messages that I want to get across
and I love it when you ask questions and
give me the chance to respond because
then everybody can be on the same page
we do have some conflicting messages
that are going on even at in the US on
some state level and some CDC levels
where some states like mine are planning
on opening some limited services
including elective procedures on Friday
but I know that my hospital is not
moving forwards elective procedures and
I'm not ready yet and so I think what to
take from the the sections that I'm
doing and others are doing on these on
these webinars is what can we do to make
sure that we create a safe environment
and can get back to work I miss patients
I miss having the activities in my
clinic that happened on a day to day
basis I love dentistry and I want to get
us back up and running as safely and as
smart and as economically reasonable as
possible so with that being said there
were some questions that pop in do I
need to change my lab coat and mask in
between general hygiene exams so if
you're just going and you're doing exams
on patients you really don't need to
change your normal standard precaution
procedures you're not going to be
generating an aerosol by doing an exam
you don't have to change buddies if you
have them on you don't have to change
your lab coat had it not be soiled if
your mask is not soiled there's no
reason to change it so it's basically we
just want to go back to routine kinds of
dental care for doing exams and so you
don't need to change your footies and
and then some of the questions that came
up I have to be honest I'm learning a
lot through
process of sharing information with you
I'm actually educating myself and trying
to get my program ready to open up in a
safe level as well so when it comes to
the different face max levels I will be
honest to tell you I did not know and so
I thought if that's the question that I
had maybe others would have that
question as well so we do have the ASTM
facemask
levels ASTM International II was
formerly known as the American Society
for testing and materials is an
international standards organization
that develops and publishes voluntary
consensus technical standards for a wide
range of materials products systems and
services and in this case masks so if
you look let's start at the bottom the
lowest performance of all of the masks
are surgically molded utility masks and
that is the picture that's on the right
so those cone masks that you see are
Syria really the lowest performing masks
that we have a level one mask or what we
can use for exams and those are typical
surgical masks they have some fluid
resistance not as much as you can see a
level three it's 80 milligrams they're
the filtration efficacy you can see how
good that is and then they look at flame
spread which they're all the same and so
as you go up on the different levels you
can see that the key is unload
resistance so ASTM level 1 low fluid
resistance ASTM level 3 has the highest
fluid resistance so you might have heard
me talk about putting your ASTM level 3
face mask over in 95 to keep it to keep
it fresh so those are some of the
reasons some of the things that we have
also if you don't have access to 2 in 95
s or K and 95 s or any of the filtration
masks that we have talked about in the
past and all you have is a level 3 it is
considered
acceptable it's not my favorite because
it's not as good at particle capture but
it is good for fluid and barrier packed
capture I also have to look at seal some
of our what are we doing remember at the
beginning I said we're not turning our
programs into operating rooms that is
not the goal even creating negative
pressure for our dental offices is
really going to be quite a challenge and
we will be addressing that as we move
forward just creating a safe environment
is number one but we look at CDC
transmission based precautions right now
remember we play with standard
precautions that means we assume that
everybody that comes into a dental
office on any given day before this new
pandemic that they had a blood-borne
pathogen so all patients would be
treated the same that's why they became
first universal precautions than
standard precautions CDC also has
transmission based precautions and for
dentistry this is going to be a little
bit new now we've known about contact
precautions that's what we work gloves
and gowns we know about you know droplet
precautions that's why we've been
wearing shields and eye protection and
surgical masks now we need to worry
about airborne precautions and that's
the step that we are actually in the
middle of our evolution remember I
talked we went from basically wet finger
dentistry only wearing gloves for pareo
procedures and oral surgery to universal
precautions based on blood-borne
pathogens to standard precautions now it
looks like the next evolution and
dentistry will be to look at how do we
manage some airborne precautions and as
you can see one of the issues that they
have on there are the n95 respirators
because that's how we have to look at
addressing this disease because it does
live in an air assault so we have
droplet precautions which are covered
usually with our standard precautions
but these are all transmission based
precautions by touching something
through droplets or through airport and
the thing that's new for us is
addressing airborne precautions I'm
going to touch on OSHA a little bit on
preparing the workplace for us to return
and get back and regretfully we are
considered a very high exposure risk job
if you look at some of the charts out
there
it's the dental team as number one as
far as people who are X and a high-risk
job just based on the fact we are so
close to our patients oral cavity and so
close to the nasal passages as well so
the high-risk jobs are ones with a high
potential for exposure for known or
suspected sources of Copan 19:00 but
remember there are a lot of people who
have this infection who are either
asymptomatic or pre-symptomatic and
don't know it and they're shedding a lot
of buyers at that time so workers in the
categories that have to deal with these
very high exposure risk jobs or of
course healthcare workers are our
frontline colleagues or doctors and
nurses and physicians assistants and
nurse practitioners our physician
extenders are pretty remarkable who
perform aerosol generating procedures
now I highlighted I put a star by
dentist which is literally what I got
from OSHA's website and of course this
is all members of the dental team we are
very high risk exposure it's due to
aerosol so that means the dentist's the
dental hygienist a dental assistants if
you have lab people in the office your
front desk staff every member of the
team that makes us as successful as we
are we need to protect and so this list
should really contain all of our members
of our team and it really becomes a more
significant when we are involved with
aerosol generating procedures so it's
not likely by walk into a room with
somebody
all that concerned but when I do get
more concerned as with his aerosol
generating procedures which I have been
talking about for some time so there are
certain kinds of controls that we can
put in place there's engineering
controls so the CDC recommends that
patients with known or suspected cope at
19 or a person under investigation they
may have run a fever they may have been
exposed should be placed in an airborne
infection isolation room if available
for most dental offices we just don't
have these kinds of rooms so what we can
do is put the patient in a an operatory
hopefully closed operatory mask the
patient up and help if they're running a
fever and help facilitate their access
to medical care this is one of those
disease states like diabetes in HIV and
cardiovascular disease and pregnancy etc
where the medical dental integration on
how we're going to manage our patients
is really very important so if you have
someone you that is ill and they're
running a fever and it's not generally
related and they show up to your office
you don't want to sort of kick them out
the room you want to put them in maybe a
private area mask them up hand hygiene
and ask if they've called their position
if not please try to facilitate the call
to the physician not just showing up
because in many places in the country
we're just beginning to open up so we
don't have a lot of isolation rooms so
we're going to have to come up with
different kinds of engineering controls
for us to create this safe environment
because it's literally I think I
mentioned I am building a new clinic I
asked for one negative pressure room and
the cost of that negative pressure room
was extraordinary now there are some
devices out there that claim that they
can turn your office face into a
negative pressure room I'm not here to
sell devices there are other people who
are much more informed on these devices
than I am and so I would talk to my rep
about those kinds of
things as far as engineering controls
look at some of the air purification
systems that are out there and that's
what I'm talking about when you speak to
your reps or people that you already
your supplies from or your equipment
people there are chair sight aerosol
extraction devices there are some that
are available now there are some that
aren't going to be available until July
you also want to look at air scrubbers
or portable portable HEPA filter units
so that they might run 24/7 and make
sure that any residual aerosol has been
dealt with there's overhead air
purification systems there are air
exchange rates that we really need to
look at to see if we can follow and a
lot of our air scrubbers actually do
have a certain amount of air exchange
rates I did put on the guidelines there
for you so you can click on this
presentation later and look and see what
the actual exchange rates are based on
what procedure that you're doing so
again this will be considered as an
engineering control there are
administrative controls that we need to
look at the OSHA so what are some of the
things that we can do that will help
protect our staff and that could be our
pre-visit screening calls where you ask
about the most common symptoms are you
running a temperature of 100 point 4 are
you having shortness of breath a dry
cough recent aches and pains are myalgia
recent diarrhea recent onset diarrhea
and of course one of the newer kinds of
signs and symptoms is loss of smell and
taste now one of the things that's
interesting about the loss of smell and
taste is we do see that with other viral
infections so right now since the flu
season is sort of over and we're just
dealing with kppen 19 for the most part
that is a good helpful diagnostic sign
but if you look what might happen in
fall when flu season comes back and
maybe we don't have a vaccine because
that would be a remarkably quick
turnaround to develop a safe vaccine for
human consumption that that we might end
up having some issues with determining
what is the fluent and what's not so but
right now if they come in with these
symptoms again if you do these calls you
pre-screen you have a little script
that's set up and then you can ask and
if you get positives on any please
advise the patient to call their primary
care provider and reschedule your visit
until their symptom free if someone does
come in the office and you get another
question to ask us or someone who is
actually sick at home or if they're not
feeling well and if we do have somebody
that does present again as I mentioned
with symptoms go ahead and mask them
make sure they they get their hands
washed and then remember some of the
things I talked about really early on is
we're taking our infection control a
little bit hopefully just a little bit
more seriously but now after that
patient and we're going to wipe down the
hard surfaces in a waiting area remember
we're not going to be dealing with as
many magazines because we're gonna toss
those so the whole object here is to is
to make sure that we keep our waiting
areas as clean and as possible provide
all workers with jobs specific education
and training so how to properly fit the
mask on Duffing and donning would be
important hand-washing hand-washing is a
number-one way of reducing
hospital-acquired infections and
healthcare requiring infections so make
sure that we're mixing up the the twenty
seconds that we hear that from the
United States government on how long you
should wash your hands and other
procurements and then look at the whu-oh
hand-washing guidelines which really
shows you more how to so you get the
outside parts of the hand you get the
areas of your thumb and and and and and
so forth and remember that this disease
is impacting people of all different
kinds of backgrounds and family members
and so may
shared that that you have some
psychological and behavioral support
available for your employees should
there be a personal crisis in their
family or a member of their family
becomes ill or god forbid someone passes
and then another thing that we can look
at is our personal protective equipment
our respiratory protection n95
respirators are always going to be the
number one thing that we want to use
there are some alternatives that we
covered last week the KN o 95 which is
actually made in China there are also
other kinds of filtering based pieces if
we can't find what we're looking for
the olestra metric half mask or full
face piece or the air purifying
respirators which are the papper devices
the powered air purifying respirators
these are something we could look into
although the the papers do appear to be
sort of bulky and in the way but my ENT
surgeon friends are using them now
without problem the other thing is it
doesn't just need to be an in 95 it can
be higher there are greater protections
out there and we'll talk about that and
NIOSH does maintain a searchable online
version of their certified equipment
list so these are approved by NIOSH
which is important again
looking more at the personal protective
equipment some of the things that we
look at all the alternatives and so I'm
showing you the different numbers here
and remember I'm learning just the same
way that everybody on these webinars is
learning I really never knew what the
instead 4 or the R stood for or the P so
n is not resistant to oil R is somewhat
resistant to oil and P is strongly
resistant arts oil proof remember in
early March the FDA did issue an
emergency use authorization allowing
certain non-medical n95 to be used in
medical
environments so there are different
kinds of devices that are listed here
and just to give you an idea that if you
can get an in 99 go for it but in 95 was
what we're recommending I also wanted to
talk about just the the PPE personnel
for in 95 or higher respirator which is
on one side of the screen you can see
this the face shield is on there or they
can have goggles I'm a big believer in
face shields just because I've been
doing this so long and when I first
started wearing facials I was amazed at
the amount of splatter that was actually
showing up on the face shields one pair
of glean clean non sterile gloves you
can wear two if you're worried about how
you're gonna take off the clothes and of
course your your gown here we're going
to be wearing the footings remember just
because a lot of the pirates can be on
the soles of your feet and I don't want
to tape it through the rest of the
building or in my car or in my home now
an acceptable alternative PPE is using a
face mask not a respirator so but this
would have to be a level 3 or up face
mask with the shield and the glasses and
I'll be frankly honest I really would
prefer that we use the respirators just
because of the era civilization of COBIT
19 and the possibility of transmission
but we can't get them because of
shortages and this is an interesting
time in our world's history then there
is alternative acceptable PPE that does
enquire using a face mask and you can
find that on CDC's a site and so where
are we we know a vaccine is going to
take some time to develop and so we
really are there's a lot of interest out
there on what treatments might be used
and so the experts of a u.s. panel did
come up with an NIH treatment guidelines
this week and they will be updated as
often as new data are published and peer
view journals I have worked with
researchers for almost 30 years and I
have never seen a situation where non
peer-reviewed papers were making it into
the press or making it into the Internet
and it makes me sort of doubt the
veracity of some of these things says
peer review is a really important part
of what we do and how we move forward so
the guidelines are going to look at two
categories of therapies used by our
colleagues in primary care which will be
antivirals which can actually target oh
good 19 directly and then host modifiers
are immune based therapies which may
influence the immune response to the
virus by directly targeting the virus
which would also be a very welcome so
we're looking at different mechanisms of
addressing treatment but presently we
don't have anything that is pre
procedure so that right now the GAR the
treatment panel the guidelines does not
recommend the use of any and any of the
agents for pre exposure prophylaxis when
we're pre exposure prophylaxis is a big
issue when we're talking about HIV
disease that when somebody is taking
their pre exposure prophylaxis they
cannot sexually transmitted HIV do we
have something that would be a
medication that would prevent
transmission of Cobra 19 at the present
time and regretfully right now the
answer is no we don't have that yet the
panel also does not recommend the use of
any agents or post exposure prophylaxis
so you know in and when we're talking
about blood-borne pathogens you know we
have a needle stick or instrument wound
or something happens during treatment
exposure to SARS Koga 2 would be sort of
could be somebody sneeze on you etc etc
so I we're just not quite there at this
time the panel does not recommend
additional laboratory testing or no
specific treatment for
persons who are asymptomatic for
pre-symptomatic and remember that that
could be a really high number that of
the 600 people on our aircraft carrier
that tested positive 60% are
asymptomatic and that really becomes the
concern it's just not watching out for
the person who has backed off a ticket
it should be somebody you know six feet
away in the grocery store line who
doesn't know they have this disease are
going to walk by you or whatever so
remember there's a big issue we have
with people not knowing their status at
present no drug has been proven to be
safe or effective for treating hope at
19 no matter what you might hear on the
press there is just insufficient data at
this point but this group will be
looking at it on a fast tracked method
and we really are just looking at some
of the immunomodulators therapies at the
pump so these are all recommendations
these are treatment guidelines but we're
not quite there yet so again what I
really wanted to stress today is we are
making some changes this has been a
remarkably difficult time for our
profession our incredible profession but
if we just look at addressing airborne
transmission concerns which aren't going
to involve completely redoing your
office but may involve the purchase of
some equipment and I know how tight
money is these days
but we have to reopen in a way that is
safe for our staffs for our team for our
patients and for our families and I'm
very thrilled that Henry Schein is
putting on this webinar so I can at
least share a little bit of information
to hopefully make restarting your
practices sooner rather than later a
reality so thank you for your time and
attendance and back to you Gary
thank you dr. Resnick again each week
you bring us valuable information and we
appreciate all the research you do to
bring this to our viewers if you have
any suggestions or comments you can
email us at webinars at Henry Schein
comm
and certainly please subscribe to our
YouTube page so you get notifications on
all the new and relevant information
until we see you again please stay safe
and stay informed
[Music]